DOC-389 | Improve Certificates in ArangoGraph (#1297)
arangodb/docs: arangograph/certificates.md

---
layout: default
description: >-
  X.509 certificates in ArangoGraph are utilized for encrypted remote administration.
  The communication with and between the servers of an ArangoGraph deployment is
  encrypted using the TLS protocol
---
# X.509 Certificates

{{ page.description }}
{:class="lead"}

X.509 certificates are digital certificates that are used to verify the
authenticity of a website, user, or organization in a public key infrastructure
(PKI). They are used in various applications, including SSL/TLS encryption,
which is the basis for HTTPS - the primary protocol for securing communication
and data transfer over a network.

The X.509 certificate format is a standard defined by the
[International Telecommunication Union (ITU)](https://www.itu.int/en/Pages/default.aspx){:target="_blank"}
and contains information such as the name of the certificate holder, the public
key associated with the certificate, the certificate's issuer, and the
certificate's expiration date. An X.509 certificate can be signed by a
certificate authority (CA) or self-signed.

ArangoGraph is using:

> - **well known X.509 certificates** created by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **well-known X.509 certificates** created by
```

checks the chain of trust to verify the authenticity of the digital certificate.
The browser checks to see if the root certificate is trusted, and if it is, it
trusts the chain of certificates that lead to the end-entity certificate.
If any of the certificates in the chain are invalid, expired, or revoked, the
browser will not trust the digital certificate.

## X.509 certificates in ArangoGraph

Each ArangoGraph deployment is accessible on two different port numbers:
- default port `8529`
- high port `18529`

Each ArangoGraph Notebook is accessible on two different port numbers:
- default port `8840`
- high port `18840`

Metrics are accessible on two different port numbers:
- default port `8829`
- high port `18829`

The distinction between these port numbers is in the certificate used for the
TLS connection.

### Well known X.509 certificates

**Well known X.509 certificates** created by
[Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/){:target="_blank"} are used on the
default ports, i.e. `8529`.

This type of certificate has a lifetime of 5 years and is rotated automatically.
It is recommended to use well known certificates, as this eases the access of a

> deployment in your browser.

Reviewer 2: IMO we should say it's a wildcard certificate, and so cannot contain SANs (as can be specified when using PE)

Reviewer 2: Note that if you create a certificate where the 'well-known' switch is turned off, both ports serve the identical self-signed certificate.

Author: done.

### Self-signed X.509 certificates

**Self-signed X.509 certificates** are used on the high ports, i.e. `18529`.
This type of certificate has a lifetime of one year and it is created by the
ArangoGraph platform. It is also rotated automatically before the expiration
date.

{% hint 'info' %}

> Unless you switch off the **Use well known certificate** option in the

Reviewer: Is it spelled "well known" without hyphen in the UI?

Author: Yes, it is spelled "well known" without a hyphen in the UI.

certificate generation, both the default and high port serve the same
self-signed certificate.
{% endhint %}

### Subject Alternative Name (SAN)

The Subject Alternative Name (SAN) is an extension to the X.509 specification 
that allows you to specify additional host names for a single SSL certificate.

When using [private endpoints](deployments.html#how-to-create-a-private-endpoint-deployment),

> [notebooks](notebooks.html), and [metrics](monitoring-metrics.html), you can specify 

Reviewer 2: remove `[notebooks](notebooks.html), and [metrics](monitoring-metrics.html),` part?

Author: done.

alternate domain names. Note that these are added **only** to the self-signed certificate
as Subject Alternative Name (SAN).

## How to create a new certificate

1. Click a project name in the **Projects** section of the main navigation.
2. Click the **Security** tab.
3. In the **Certificates** section, click:
   - The **New certificate** button to create a new certificate.
   - A name or the **eye** icon in the **Actions** column to view a certificate.
     The dialog that opens provides commands for installing and uninstalling
     the certificate through a console.
   - The **pencil** icon to edit a certificate.
     You can also view a certificate and click the **Edit** button.
   - The **tag** icon to make the certificate the new default.
   - The **recycle bin** icon to delete a certificate.

![ArangoGraph Create New Certificate](images/arangograph-new-certificate.png)

> Certificates that have the **Use well known certificate** option enabled do

Reviewer: Same question

> not need any installation and will be supported by almost all web browsers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not need any installation and are supported by almost all web browsers
```

automatically.

> When creating a self-signed certificate that has the **Use well known certificate**

Reviewer: Same question

option disabled, the certificate needs to be installed on your local machine as
well. This operation slightly varies between operating systems.

![ArangoGraph Certificates](images/arangograph-cert-page-with-cert-present.png)

![ArangoGraph Certificate Install Instructions](images/arangograph-cert-install-instructions.png)

## How to connect to your application

> [ArangoDB drivers](../drivers/index.html), also called connectors, allow you to

Reviewer 3: Yes, links restructuring handle both cases of {section}/ and {section}/index.html.
Both cases get translated to {section}/_index.md

> easily connect and manipulate ArangoGraph deployments right from within your

Author: removed the problematic term.

application. 

1. Navigate to the **Deployments** tab and click the **View** button to show the
   deployment page.
2. In the Quick start section, click the **Connecting drivers** button.
3. Select your programming language, i.e. Go, Java, Python, etc.

> 4. Use the code examples to connect a driver to your deployment.

Reviewer: I think you should point out here that the example includes code for dealing with certificates. Otherwise you can only tell from the screenshot why this section about drivers is on the certificates page.

Author: Good point 👍

![ArangoGraph Connecting Drivers](images/arangograph-connecting-drivers.png)

## Certificate Rotation

Every certificate has a self-signed root certificate that is going to expire.
When certificates that are used in existing deployments are about to expire,
an automatic rotation of the certificates is triggered. This means that the

> certificate is cloned and all affected deployments then start using

Reviewer 2: Clones means here that all settings are copied over to a new certificate, like lifetime (which can be set to something different then the default 1/5yr when using OasisCtl/Terraform when creating a certificate).

trusts the chain of certificates that lead to the end-entity certificate.
If any of the certificates in the chain are invalid, expired, or revoked, the
browser does not trust the digital certificate.

## X.509 certificates in ArangoGraph

Each ArangoGraph deployment is accessible on two different port numbers:
- default port `8529`
- high port `18529`

Each ArangoGraph Notebook is accessible on two different port numbers:
- default port `8840`
- high port `18840`

Metrics are accessible on two different port numbers:
- default port `8829`
- high port `18829`

The distinction between these port numbers is in the certificate used for the
TLS connection.

### Well-known X.509 certificates

**Well-known X.509 certificates** created by
[Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/){:target="_blank"} are used on the
default ports, i.e. `8529`.

This type of certificate has a lifetime of 5 years and is rotated automatically.
It is recommended to use well-known certificates, as this eases access of a
deployment in your browser.

{% hint 'info' %}
The well-known certificate is a wildcard certificate and cannot contain
Subject Alternative Names (SANs). To include a SAN field, which is needed

> for private endpoints, please use the self-signed certificate.

Reviewer: Should this say "a self-signed certificate" or "the self-signed certificate option"?

Author: Changed to "the self-signed certificate option".

the self-signed certificate as Subject Alternative Name (SAN).

## How to create a new certificate

1. Click a project name in the **Projects** section of the main navigation.
2. Click the **Security** tab.
3. In the **Certificates** section, click:
   - The **New certificate** button to create a new certificate.
   - A name or the **eye** icon in the **Actions** column to view a certificate.
     The dialog that opens provides commands for installing and uninstalling
     the certificate through a console.
   - The **pencil** icon to edit a certificate.
     You can also view a certificate and click the **Edit** button.
   - The **tag** icon to make the certificate the new default.
   - The **recycle bin** icon to delete a certificate.

![ArangoGraph Create New Certificate](images/arangograph-new-certificate.png)

Certificates that have the **Use well-known certificate** option enabled do
not need any installation and are supported by almost all web browsers
automatically.

When creating a self-signed certificate that has the **Use well-known certificate**
option disabled, the certificate needs to be installed on your local machine as

> well. This operation slightly varies between operating systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
well. This operation varies between operating systems.
```

Point out that this is described in the UI?

Author: It is already mentioned above in How to create a new certificate.
